By the end of 2026, an estimated 13 billion tonnes, or 13 Gigatonnes (GT), of plastic waste will have been produced globally [plastic pollution citation here]. About half of the waste will have been managed through recycling or incineration, but the fate of the rest remains unaccounted for in the environment. Plastic-degrading enzymes represent a promising solution to this plastic problem. These enzymes are capable of degrading plastics down into its constituent monomers, which are then available for the repolymerization of new plastic-products, or biodegradation. 


Existing databases of plastic-degrading enzymes are limited in scope and biodiversity. A notable database, the plastics-active enzymes database (PAZy), contains 501 functionally functionally verified plastic-active enzymes. This dataset is constrained by limited diversity, with most enzymes being homologs of LCC or IsPETase. Sequence-based mining for the discovery of new enzymes has been done, and has produced real results. Danso et al., 2018, discovered 504 candidates from database searches on UniprotKB and NCBI-nr, alongside 349 candidates from mining 133 metagenomes. More recent attempts, such as Erickson et al., 2022 expanded by screening 87 targeted hot-spring metagenomes (~38 million sequences) for plastic-degrading enzymes, characterizing 74 putative enzymes, and further testing 51 for activity, and characterizing 23 novel plastic-active enzymes. Overall, these previous surveys have merely scrapped the surface of the plastic-degrading enzyme diversity that exists within metagenomic datasets.


In our previous work, we build Logan, a tool that assembled the entire SRA, 27.3 metagenomic datasets, and searched for plastic-degrading enzymes, retrieving 215.7M putative plastic-degrading enzymes from an input query of 213 characterized plastic-degrading enzymes.  We demonstrated that the discovery of novel plastic-degrading enzymes within this dataset is possible through operationally random selection. However, the lack of annotations prevents strategic selection of putative plastic-degrading enzymes for validation.


Here we present PETadex, methodological and quantitative rebuild of our previous dataset. This novel dataset supports the targeted selection of enzymes with plastic-degrading activity. Using an input dataset of 412 plastic-degrading enzymes, we searched NCBI-nr and the SRA (using the Logan assembly), constraining results using catalytic-residue-constrained profile HMMs. As a result, we’ve built a dataset of [x] million enzymes that carry the catalytic domain boundaries, annotated with fold-assignments, protein-structures and the temperature/pH of the biosamples of origin. This enables candidate plastic-degrading enzymes to be filtered based on catalytic integrity, structural fold, and metadata properties prior to testing. This enables the high throughput targeted-selection of candidates, a process which can be further automated using innovative machine learning methods. The dataset of enzymes, annotations and a toolkit of applicable methods are freely available at petadex.net.